docs: add post on use of Great Tables in Pointblank library (#595)
posit-dev/great-tables: docs/blog/pointblank-intro/index.qmd

---
title: "How We Used Great Tables to Supercharge Reporting in Pointblank"
html-table-processing: none
author: Rich Iannone
date: 2025-02-03
freeze: true
jupyter: python3
---

> The Great Tables package allows you to make tables, and they're really great when part of a report, a book, or a web page. The API is meant to be easy to work with so DataFrames could be made into publication-qualty tables without a lot of hassle. And having nice-looking tables in the mix elevates the quality of the medium you're working in.

Reviewer: publication-quality?

We were inspired by this and decided to explore what it could mean to introduce a package where reporting is largely in the form of beautiful tables. To this end, we started work on a new Python package that generates tables (c/o Great Tables) as reporting objects. This package is called [Pointblank](https://github.com/posit-dev/pointblank), its focus is that of data validation, and the reporting tables it can produce informs users on the results of a data validation workflow. In this post we'll go through how Pointblank:

- enables you to validate many types of DataFrames and SQL databases
- provides easy-to-understand validation result tables and thorough drilldowns
- gives you nice previews of data tables across a range of backends

### Validating data with Pointblank

> Just like Great Tables, Pointblank's primary input is a table and the goal of that library is to perform checks of the tabular data. Other libraries in this domain include [Great Expectations](https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations), [pandera](https://github.com/unionai-oss/pandera), and [Soda](https://github.com/sodadata/soda-core?tab=readme-ov-file), and [PyDeequ](https://github.com/awslabs/python-deequ). Let's look at the main reporting table that users are likely to see quite often.
> 

Reviewer 2: Prep'ing people for what they'll be seeing in example

```suggestion
Just like Great Tables, Pointblank's primary input is a table and the goal of that library is to perform checks of the tabular data. Other libraries in this domain include [Great Expectations](https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations), [pandera](https://github.com/unionai-oss/pandera), [Soda](https://github.com/sodadata/soda-core?tab=readme-ov-file), and [PyDeequ](https://github.com/awslabs/python-deequ).

Below is the main validation report table that users are likely to see quite often. Each row is a validation step, with columns reporting details about each step and their results.

```

Author: Thanks! Adding this in.

```{python}
#| code-fold: true
#| code-summary: "Show the code"

import pointblank as pb

validation = (
    pb.Validate(
        data=pb.load_dataset(dataset="small_table", tbl_type="polars"),
        label="An example validation",
        thresholds=(0.1, 0.2, 0.5),
    )
    .col_vals_gt(columns="d", value=1000)
    .col_vals_le(columns="c", value=5)
    .col_exists(columns=["date", "date_time"])
    .interrogate()
)

validation
```

> The table is chock full of the information you need when doing data validation tasks. And it's also easy on the eyes. Some cool features include:

Reviewer 2: Directed attention at example

```suggestion
The first validation step (`cols_val_gt()`) checks the `d` column in the data, to ensure each value is greater than `1000`. Notice that the red bar on the left indicates it failed, and the `FAIL` column says it has 6 failing values out of 13 `UNITS`. 

The table is chock full of the information you need when doing data validation tasks. And it's also easy on the eyes. Some cool features include:
```

Author: Thanks! This will be added in.

2. vertical color strips on the left side to indicate overall status of the rows
3. icons in several columns (space saving and they let you know what's up)
4. 'CSV' buttons that, when clicked, provide you with a CSV file
5. a footer with timing information for the analysis

It's a nice table and it scales nicely to the large variety of validation types and options available in the Pointblank library. Viewing this table is a central part of using that library and the great thing about the reporting being a table like this is that it can be shared by placing it in a publication environment of your choosing (for example, it could be put in a Quarto document).

Here is the code that was used to generate the data validation above:

```{python}
#| eval: false

import pointblank as pb

validation = (
    pb.Validate(
        data=pb.load_dataset(dataset="small_table", tbl_type="polars"),
        label="An example validation",
        thresholds=(0.1, 0.2, 0.5),
    )
    .col_vals_gt(columns="d", value=1000)
    .col_vals_le(columns="c", value=5)
    .col_exists(columns=["date", "date_time"])
    .interrogate()
)

validation
```

> Pointblank makes it easy to get started by giving you a simple entry point (`Validate()`), allowing you to define as many validation steps as needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pointblank makes it easy to get started by giving you a simple entry point (`Validate()`), allowing you to define as many validation steps as needed. Each validation step is specified by calling methods like `.cols_vals_gt()`, which is short for checking that "column values are greater than" some specified value.
```

Author: This is good. Using it!

Pointblank enables you to validate many types of DataFrames and SQL databases. Pointblank supports Pandas and Polars through Narwhals, and numerous backends (like DuckDB and MySQL) are also supported though our Ibis integration.

### Exploring data validation failures

> Note that the above validation showed 6 failures in the first step. You might want to know exactly *what* failed, giving you a chance to fix the underlying data quality issues. To do that, you can use the `get_step_report()` method:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the above validation report table showed 6 failures in the first validation step. You might want to know exactly *what* failed, giving you a chance to fix the underlying data quality issues. To do that, you can use the `get_step_report()` method:
```

Author: Much clearer! Adding it in.

```{python}
validation.get_step_report(i=1)
```

The use of a table for reporting is ideal here! The main features of this step report table include:

1. a header with summarized information
2. the selected rows that contain the failures
3. a highlighted column of interest

Different types of validation methods will have step report tables that organize the pertinent information in a way that makes sense for the validation performed.

### Previewing datasets across backends

> Because Pointblank supports many backends, with varying ways for displaying the underlying data, we provide the `preview()` function. With that you can get a beautiful and consistent view of any data table. Here is how it looks against a 2,000 row DuckDB table that's included in the package (`game_revenue`):

Reviewer 2: Tweaked a bit to clarify that backends vary (not pointblank), which motivates `preview()`

```suggestion
Because many of the backends Pointblank supports have varying ways to view the underlying data, we provide a unified `preview()` function. It gives you a beautiful and consistent view of any data table. Here is how it looks against a 2,000 row DuckDB table that's included in the package (`game_revenue`):
```

Author: Nice! Definitely adding this in.

```{python}
# | code-fold: true
# | code-summary: "Show the code"

pb.preview(pb.load_dataset(dataset="game_revenue", tbl_type="duckdb"))
```

> The `preview()` function had a few design goals in mind:

Reviewer 2: Directed people's attention at example:

```suggestion
Notice that table displays only 10 rows by default, 5 from the top and 5 from the bottom. The grey text on the left of the table indicates the row number, and a blue line helps demarcate top and bottom rows.

The `preview()` function had a few design goals in mind:
```

Author: This is great! Will add it in.
